[ADD] Upgrade documentation for developers (#6757)
odoo/documentation: content/developer/howtos/upgrade_custom_db.rst

:show-content:
:show-toc:

.. _upgrade/upgrade_custom_db:

===============================
Upgrading a customized database
===============================

Upgrading to a new version of Odoo can be challenging, 
especially if the database you work on contains custom modules.  
This page intent is to explain the technical process of upgrading a database with customized modules.
For numerous years, Odoo has followed this process, reaping the rewards of continual improvements along the way.

For a standard overview, please refer to the
:doc:`upgrade documentation </administration/upgrade>`.

> We consider a custom module, any module that extends the standard code of Odoo and that was not built with studio. 

Reviewer: Could it be better to say?
```suggestion
We consider a custom module, any module that extends the standard code of Odoo and that was not built with the Studio app. 
```

a standard upgrade of an Odoo database since the source code of the custom modules
must be upgraded as well. 

Here are the steps we follow at Odoo to upgrade such databases:

#. :ref:`Stop the devolopments and challenge them <upgrade/stop_developments>`  .
#. :ref:`Request an upgraded database <upgrade/request_upgrade>`.
#. :ref:`Make your module installable on an empty database <upgrade/empty_database>`.
#. :ref:`Make your module installable on the upgraded database <upgrade/upgraded_database>`.
#. :ref:`Test extensively and do a rehearsal <upgrade/testing_rehearsal>`.
#. :ref:`Upgrade in production <upgrade/production>`.

.. _upgrade/stop_developments:

Stop the developments
=============================

Upgrade can be a tough process, starting it requires commitment and will block a significant amount of your development resources.
If you decide to keep going for developments during that process,
you will inevitably have to block resources for a longer time to work on the upgrade.
Those features will need to be re-upgraded and tested, everytime you change them.

This is why we recommend a complete freeze of the codebase when starting the upgrade process.

> Of course, you can still work on maintenance but developing new features is not productive.

Reviewer: Maybe `bugfix` instead of maintenance?
That how we call it but IMO, "bugfix" is more understandable and means a smaller scope.
```suggestion
Of course, you can still work on bigfix but developing new features is not productive.
```

:show-content:

.. _upgrade_custom/upgrade_custom_db:

===============================
Upgrading a customized database
===============================

Upgrading to a new version of Odoo can be challenging, especially if the database you work on
contains custom modules. This page intent is to explain the technical process of upgrading a

> database with customized modules. For a standard overview, please refer to the

Reviewer 2: What is a "standard overview" in this context?

Maybe: "For the functional process/perspective"?

> :doc:`Upgrade documentation </administration/upgrade>`.

Reviewer: I don't see the need for this, it's not detailed in any other documentation page and no Odoo developer reads all the documentation anyway (you go on it only if you need it for a specific reason at a certain point).

We consider a custom module, any module that extends the standard code of Odoo and that was not
built with the Studio app. 

> Before upgrading those modules, or before asking for them to be upgraded, have a look at the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before upgrading such a module, or before asking its upgrade, have a look at the
```

:ref:`upgrade/sla` to make sure who's responsible for it.

While working on what we refer to as the **custom upgrade** of your database, keep in mind the goals
of an upgrade:

#. Stay supported
#. Get the latest features
#. Enjoy the performance improvement
#. Reduce the technical debt
#. Benefit from security improvements

> With every new version of Odoo, changes are introduced. These changes can have an impact modules on

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With every new version of Odoo, changes are introduced. These changes can impact modules on
```

which customization have been developed. This is the reason why upgrading a database that contains

> custom modules requires additional steps in order to upgrade their source code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
custom modules requires additional steps in order to upgrade the source code.
```
```suggestion
custom modules requires additional steps in order to upgrade its source code.
```

These are the steps to follow to upgrade customized databases:

#. :ref:`Stop the devolopments and challenge them <upgrade_custom/stop_developments>`.
#. :ref:`upgrade_custom/request_upgrade`.
#. :ref:`Make your module installable on an empty database <upgrade_custom/empty_database>`.
#. :ref:`Make your module installable on the upgraded database <upgrade_custom/upgraded_database>`.
#. :ref:`Test extensively and do a rehearsal <upgrade_custom/testing_rehearsal>`.

> #. :ref:`Upgrade in production <upgrade_custom/production>`.

Reviewer 2: If these are really steps you could also prepend numbers to the header.

Reviewer: Would you recommend to do something similar to the [Bugfix update page]?(https://www.odoo.com/documentation/17.0/administration/maintain/update.html)
![image](https://github.com/odoo/documentation/assets/28193899/67af70fb-c3a6-40ce-9680-67939535ea43)

Reviewer 2: Yeah, it's an idea. The thing is that very few people actually read documentation through and through; they scroll until they find something that looks like the solution to their problem. Introducing steps will help clarify that sections must be read in a sequence.

Reviewer: Sound good to me, I didn't think of that
Thanks for pointing it out! :+1:

.. _upgrade_custom/stop_developments:

Stop the developments
=====================

> Starting an upgrade requires commitment and development resources need to be allocated to it. If

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting an upgrade requires commitment and development resources. If
```

developments keep being made at the same time, those features will need to be re-upgraded and tested

> everytime you change them. This is why we recommend a complete freeze of the codebase when starting

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
every time you change them. This is why we recommend a complete freeze of the codebase when starting
```

the upgrade process. Needless to say, bug fixing is exempt from this recommendation.

Once you have stopped development, it is a good practice to assess the developments made and compare
them with the features introduced between your current version and the version you are targeting.

> Challenge the developments as much as possible, find functionnal workarounds.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Challenge the developments as much as possible and find functional workarounds.
```

Removing redundancy between your developments and the standard version of Odoo will lead to an eased

> upgrade process and reduce the technical debt.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
upgrade process and reduce technical debt.
```

   You can find information on the changes between versions in the `Release Notes
   <https:/odoo.com/page/release-notes>`_.

.. _upgrade_custom/request_upgrade:

Request an upgraded database
============================

Once the developments have stopped for the custom modules and the implemented features have been
challenged to remove redundancy and unnecessary code, the next step is to request an upgraded test
database. To do so, follow the steps mentioned in :ref:`upgrade/request-test-database`, depending on
the hosting type of your database.

The purpose of this stage is not to start working with the custom modules in the upgraded database,
but to make sure the standard upgrade process works seamlessly, and the test database is delivered
properly. If that's not the case, and the upgrade request fails, request the assistance of Odoo via
the `support page <https://odoo.com/help?stage=migration>`_ by selecting the option related to
testing the upgrade. 

.. _upgrade_custom/empty_database:

Empty database
==============

Before working on an upgraded test database, we recommend to make the custom developments work on an
empty database in the targeted version of your upgrade. 

> This ensures that the customization is compatible with the new version of Odoo, allows to analyse

Reviewer 2: en-US
```suggestion
This ensures that the customization is compatible with the new version of Odoo, allows to analyze
```

> how does it behave and interact with the new features, and guarantees that they will not cause any

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
how it behaves and interacts with the new features, and guarantees that they will not cause any
```

> issue when upgrading the database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
issues when upgrading the database.
```

> Making the custom modules work in an empty database also helps avoiding changes and wrong

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Making the custom modules work in an empty database also helps avoid changes and wrong
```

> configurations that might be present on the production database (like studio customization,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
configurations that might be present in the production database (like studio customization,
```

customized website pages, email templates or translations). They are not intrinsically related to
the custom modules and that can raise unwanted issues in this stage of the upgraded process.

To make custom modules work on an empty database we advise to follow these steps:

- :ref:`upgrade_custom/empty_database/modules_installable`
- :ref:`upgrade_custom/empty_database/test_fixes`
- :ref:`upgrade_custom/empty_database/clean_code`

> - :ref:`Make standard tests run successfully <upgrade_custom/empty_database/standard_test>`

Reviewer 2: Numbered list?

For this, install the custom modules, one by one, in an empty database of the new Odoo version and
fix the tracebacks and warnings that arise from that.

This process will help detect issues during the installation of the modules. For example:

- Invalid module dependencies.
- Syntax change: assets declaration, OWL updates, attrs.
- References to standard fields, models, views not existing anymore or renamed.
- Xpath that moved or were removed from views.
- Methods renamed or removed.
- ...

.. _upgrade_custom/empty_database/test_fixes:

Test and fixes
--------------

Once there are no more tracebacks when installing the modules, the next step is to test them.
Even if the custom modules are installable on an empty database, this does not guarantee there are
no errors during their execution. Because of this, we encourage to test thoroughly all the
customization to make sure everything is working as expected.

This process will help detect further issues that are not identified during the module installation
and can only be detected in runtime. For example, deprecated calls to standard python or OWL

> functions, non existing references to standard fields, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
functions, non-existing references to standard fields, etc.
```

> We recommend to test all the customization, specially the following elements:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We recommend to test all the customization, especially the following elements:
```

  works for all the standard workflows.

.. _upgrade_custom/upgraded_database:

Upgraded database
=================

Once the custom modules are installable and working properly in an empty database, it is time to
make them work on an :ref:`upgraded database <upgrade/request-test-database>`.

To make sure the custom code is working flawlessly in the new version, follow these steps:

- :ref:`upgrade_custom/upgraded_database/migrate_data`
- :ref:`upgrade_custom/upgraded_database/test_custom`

.. _upgrade_custom/upgraded_database/migrate_data:

Migrate the data
----------------

During the upgrade of the custom modules, you might have to use migration scripts to reflect changes
from the source code to their corresponding data.

- Any technical data that was renamed during the upgrade of the custom code (models, fields, external
  identifiers) should be renamed using migration scripts to avoid data loss during the module upgrade.
- Data from standard models removed from the source code of the newer Odoo version and from the
  database during the standard upgrade process might need to be recovered from the old model table

>   if it is stil present.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  if it is still present.
```

Migration scripts can also be used to:

- Ease the processing time of an upgrade. For example, to store the value of computed stored fields

>   on models with an excesive amount of records by using SQL queries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  on models with an excessive number of records by using SQL queries.
```

- Recompute fields in case the computation of their value has changed.
- Uninstall unwanted custom modules.
- Correct faulty data or wrong configurations.

.. _upgrade_custom/upgraded_database/test_custom:

Test the custom modules
-----------------------

To make sure the custom modules work properly with your data in the upgraded database, they need to
be tested as well. This helps ensure both the standard and the custom data stored in the database

> are consistent and nothing was lost during the upgrade process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
are consistent and that nothing was lost during the upgrade process.
```

Things to pay attention to:

> - Views not working: During the upgrade, if a view causes issues because of it's content, it gets

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Views not working: During the upgrade, if a view causes issues because of its content, it gets
```

>   disabled. You can find the information of disabled views on the :ref:`Upgraded report

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  disabled. You can find the information on disabled views on the :ref:`Upgraded report
```

>   <upgrade/upgrade_report>`. This views need to be activated again. To achieve this, we recommend

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  <upgrade/upgrade_report>`. This view needs to be activated again. To achieve this, we recommend
```

  the use of migration scripts.
- :doc:`Module data <../tutorials/define_module_data>` not updated: Custom records that have the
  ``noupdate`` flag are not updated when upgrading the module in the new database. For the custom
  data that needs to be updated due to changes in the new version, we recommend to use migration
  scripts to do so.

.. _upgrade_custom/testing_rehearsal:

Testing and rehearsal
=====================

When the custom modules are working properly in the upgraded database, it is crucial to do another
round of testing to assess the database usability and detect any issue that might have gone
unnoticed in previous tests. For further information about testing the upgraded database, check 
:ref:`upgrade/test_your_db`.

As mentioned in :ref:`upgrade/upgrade-prod`, both standard upgrade scripts and your database are
constantly evolving. Therefore it is highly recommended to frequently request new upgraded test
databases and ensure that the upgrade process is still successful.

In adition to that, make a full rehearsal of the upgrade process the day before upgrading the

> production database to avoid an undesired behavior during the upgrade and to detect any issue that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
production database to avoid undesired behavior during the upgrade and to detect any issue that
```

> might have ocurred with the migrated data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
might have occurred with the migrated data.
```

With every new version of Odoo, changes are introduced. These changes can have an impact modules on
which customization have been developed. This is the reason why upgrading a database that contains
custom modules requires additional steps in order to upgrade their source code.

These are the steps to follow to upgrade customized databases:

#. :ref:`Stop the devolopments and challenge them <upgrade_custom/stop_developments>`.
#. :ref:`upgrade_custom/request_upgrade`.
#. :ref:`Make your module installable on an empty database <upgrade_custom/empty_database>`.
#. :ref:`Make your module installable on the upgraded database <upgrade_custom/upgraded_database>`.
#. :ref:`Test extensively and do a rehearsal <upgrade_custom/testing_rehearsal>`.
#. :ref:`Upgrade in production <upgrade_custom/production>`.

.. _upgrade_custom/stop_developments:

Stop the developments
=====================

Starting an upgrade requires commitment and development resources need to be allocated to it. If
developments keep being made at the same time, those features will need to be re-upgraded and tested
everytime you change them. This is why we recommend a complete freeze of the codebase when starting

> the upgrade process. Needless to mention that bug fixing is exempt from this recommendation.

Reviewer 3: If you are using Needless, I would personally write it this way:  `Needless to say, bug fixing is exempt from this recommendation.`, feels more natural to me than `Needless to mention that`

Once you have stopped development, it is a good practice to assess the developments made and compare

> them with the features introduced between you current version and the version you are targeting.

Reviewer 3: between you**r** (r is missing)

Challenge the developments as much as possible, find functionnal workarounds.
Removing redundancy between your developments and the standard version of Odoo will lead to an eased
upgrade process and reduce the technical debt.

.. note::
   You can find information on the changes between versions in the `release notes

>    <https:/odoo.com/page/release-notes>`_. Those may seem light at first but they will help point

Reviewer 3: The sentence `Those may seem light at first but ...` stood out when reading this, IMO it clashes with the style of the other sentences and the global tone of the page. I don't think we should introduce any biais towards the release notes and let the reader decide if they feel like they are light or not IMO

   out what needs to be checked during the upgrade process.

.. _upgrade_custom/request_upgrade:

Request an upgraded database
============================

Once the developments have stopped for the custom modules and the implemented features have been
challenged to remove redundancy and unnecessary code, the next step is to request an upgraded test

> database. To request the upgraded test database, follow the steps mentioned in

Reviewer 3: `... the next step is to request an upgraded test database. To request the upgraded test database ...` maybe we could start the next sentence with `To do so, ...` to avoid repetition ? :D

- :ref:`upgrade_custom/empty_database/clean_code`
- :ref:`Make standard tests run successfully <upgrade_custom/empty_database/standard_test>`

.. _upgrade_custom/empty_database/modules_installable:

Make custom modules installable
-------------------------------

The first step is to make the custom modules installable in the new Odoo version.
This means, starting by ensuring there are no tracebacks or warnings during their installation.
For this, install the custom modules, one by one, in an empty database of the new Odoo version and
fix the tracebacks and warnings that arise from that.

.. todo:: Add examples or references to PR such as attrs change

This process will help detect issues during the installation of the modules. For example:

- Invalid module dependencies.
- Syntax change: assets declaration, OWL updates, attrs.
- References to standard fields, models, views not existing anymore or renamed.
- Xpath that moved or were removed from views.
- Methods renamed or removed.
- ...

.. _upgrade_custom/empty_database/test_fixes:

Test and fixes
--------------

Once there are no more tracebacks when installing the modules, the next step is to test them.

> Even if the custom modules are installable on an empty database, this does not warranty there are no

Reviewer 3: I think this should be `this does not warrant ...` as warranty is the common word, while warrant is the verb :D

This process will help detect issues during the installation of the modules. For example:

- Invalid module dependencies.
- Syntax change: assets declaration, OWL updates, attrs.
- References to standard fields, models, views not existing anymore or renamed.
- Xpath that moved or were removed from views.
- Methods renamed or removed.
- ...

.. _upgrade_custom/empty_database/test_fixes:

Test and fixes
--------------

Once there are no more tracebacks when installing the modules, the next step is to test them.
Even if the custom modules are installable on an empty database, this does not warranty there are no
errors during their execution. Because of this, we encourage to test thoroughly all the
customization to make sure everything is working as expected.

This process will help detect further issues that are not identified during the module installation
and can only be detected in runtime. For example, deprecated calls to standard python or OWL
functions, non existing references to standard fields, etc.

We recommend to test all the customization, specially the following elements:

> - Views

Reviewer: Maybe not fail at runtime, but maybe the elements added are not displayed anymore in the place they are intended compared to the previous version, so I recommend to test it too

Making the custom modules work in an empty database also helps avoiding changes and wrong
configurations that might be present on the production database (like studio customization,
customized website pages, mail templates or translations), which are not intrinsically related to the
custom modules and that can raises unwanted issues in this stage of the upgraded process.

To make custom modules work on an empty database we advise to follow this steps:

  - :ref:`Make them installable <upgrade/empty_database/modules_installable>`
  - :ref:`Test and fixes <upgrade/empty_database/test_fixes>`
  - :ref:`Clean the code <upgrade/empty_database/clean_code>`
  - :ref:`Make standard tests run successfully <upgrade/empty_database/standard_test>`

.. TODO Check if needed
.. At this stage, all the custom modules will be properly upgraded and fully functioning on an empty
.. database and their code clean.
.. It is ready to make the custom modules installable on the upgraded database.

.. _upgrade/empty_database/modules_installable:

Make custom modules installable
-------------------------------

The first step is to make the custom modules installable in the new Odoo version.

> This means, in a first instance, making sure there is no traceback or warnings when installing them.

Author: I'm not sure about this sentence (all though your english is better than mine)

For this, install the custom modules (ideally, one by one) in an empty database targeting the new
Odoo version and fix the tracebacks and warnings that arise from that.

.. TODO Re-check and explain better the examples 

This process will help detect issues during the installation of the modules.
For example, invalid module dependencies, syntax changes (like the assets declaration, OWL updates,
mail templates from Jinja to Qweb), non existing references to standard fields, models, views, etc.

.. _upgrade/empty_database/test_fixes:

Test and fixes
--------------

Once there are no more tracebacks when installing the modules, the next step is to test them.
Even if the custom modules are installable in an empty database, this does not warranties there are
no errors during their execution.
Because of this, we encourage to test thoroughly all the customization to make sure everything
is working as expected.

This process will help detect further issues that are not identified during the module installation
and can only be detected in runtime.
For example, deprecated calls to standard python or OWL functions, non existing references to
standard fields, etc.

> .. TODO Expand in the tests and their explanation

Author: IMO, we don't really need to. Any developer knows what testing is, I think that specifying what they should look at is enough.

Reviewer: I'm not sure why I added this :thinking: 
That means we can remove it

We recommend to test all the customization, specially the following elements:

  - Views
  - Mail templates
  - Reports
  - Server actions and automated actions
  - Changes in the standard workflows

We also encourage to write automated tests to save time during the testing iterations, increase
the coverage of the tests, and ensure that the changes and fixes introduced do not break the
existing flows.
If there are tests already implemented in the customization, make sure they are upgraded to the new
Odoo version and run successfully, fixing issues that might be present.

.. _upgrade/empty_database/clean_code:

Clean the code
--------------

At this stage of the upgrade process, we also suggest to clean the code as much as possible.
This includes: 

  - Remove redundant and unnecessary code.

>   - Remove features that are now part of Odoo standard.

Author: This is already explained in section "stop the development

Reviewer: Should we include a reference to that part of the doc or remove this point?

Author: Absolutely!

type of your database.

The purpose of this stage is not to start working with the custom modules in the upgraded database,
but to make sure the standard upgrade process works seamlessly, and the test database is delivered
properly.
If that's not the case, and the upgrade request fails, you can request the assistance of Odoo via
the `support page <https://odoo.com/help?stage=migration>`__ by selecting the option related to
testing the upgrade. 

.. _upgrade/empty_database:

[WIP] Empty database
====================

Before working on an upgraded test database, we recommend to make the custom developments work on an
empty database in the targeted version of your upgrade.

This ensures that the customization is compatible with the new version of Odoo, allows to analyse
how does it behave and interact with the new features, and guarantees that they will not cause
any issue when upgrading the database.

Making the custom modules work in an empty database also helps avoiding changes and wrong
configurations that might be present on the production database (like studio customization,
customized website pages, mail templates or translations). They are not intrinsically related to the

> custom modules and that can raise unwanted issues in this stage of the upgraded process.

Author: We could make this more convicing
